---
layout: post
title: We Need to be Careful how we Engage with Woke Capitalism
date: 2022-03-16
author: "Jonathan Barazzutti (Pyrublaze)"
---

I’m a very progressive person in my social life. I support LGBT rights, the Black Lives Matter movement, and essentially almost everything that could be regarded as progressive. However, something always rubbed me the wrong way about how advertising deals with these issues. I would walk to my local convenience store, looking for some candy because I love sugar, and stumble on products such as “Pride Skittles”, where they remove the colors of the skittles for a symbolic message of support for LGBT people. The same thing happened when I watched the Collin Kaepernick Nike commercial, or the Gillette “Best a Man can Get” video.

Obviously, I support the Pride movement, I don’t want black people to get disproportionately brutalized by cops, and I don’t like when men rape women. There’s just something that feels shoehorned about the whole thing. A corporation is almost entirely committed to making money, so why are these popular social causes being put into their advertising? It doesn’t make sense to divide people on political lines in a commercial intended to sell a product. Unless there is something deeper.

However, before I get into that, I want to go on a brief diversion for a moment. I promise it’s going somewhere. A common talking point against BLM is to just say “13/50”. That is, the famous FBI statistic that despite only making up 13% of the American population, black people commit 50% of the violent crime. Therefore, it makes perfect sense to disproportionately over-police and brutalize black people, because they are disproportionately engaging in violent crime.

There are two problems with this line of argumentation. Firstly, even though black people commit more crime on average, police over-account for this. Evn controlling for contextual factors, black people are more likely to be brutalized by the police, at the very least due to the fact that black people are more likely to be confronted by the police than white people. However, this is not the essential problem. The question is why do black people commit a disproportionate amount of crime?

If we abstract it enough, there are only two causes for social behavior in society: genetic or environmental. The reason why black people commit a disproportionately high amount of crime can only be either genetic, environmental, or some combination of the two. In my estimation, the genetic differences between races are largely superficial ones, amounting to small physical differences which have little to no effect on actual differences in psychology between the races. Therefore, we can say that this crime disparity caused by environmental factors.

Crime is caused by a variety of factors, but one of the most important ones is poverty, which is something which black people happen to suffer disproportionately. We can move back a step from here and ask why black people are poor, and this is primarily due to a combination of present and past discrimination which translates into differential outcomes for blacks and whites. The economic disparities we see today are a result of slavery, segregation, and many other forms of systematic and systemic oppression.

Now, I’m not making an economic essentialist argument here. Racism has always been underpinned by human bias, and not all racism can be attributed to economics. However, economics is something which is essential to the understanding of how racism operates today. Even if no cop today is biased disproportionately against black people, there would still be oppression going on because the reason why cops are disproportionately brutalizing black people is because of past oppression. Obviously, the brutalization of black people is in part due to bias, but economics is a very important driver of this.

However, big corporations seem to only focus on the bias. They don’t even really focus on the economic element of this in any substantive way. A Nike advertisement about how police brutality is bad doesn’t fix any of the economic problems the black community faces. It just virtue signals about how some cops are biased.

The closest thing that corporations engage in which can be argued to at least be attempting to tackle much of the bias present within society is diversity hiring. Cultivation theory states that the increased exposure to minority groups makes people less likely to be prejudiced towards them. In essence, cultivation theory posits an exposure therapy to help alleviate prejudice that exists against minority groups. Exposure can be done in multiple ways, such as having minorities in television or other forms of media or having minorities within a person’s social or work life. Because corporations will put out diversity hiring policies, it can be argued that corporations engage in a form of exposure therapy, which reduces prejudice through exposing people in higher-up positions in the economy to minority groups.

Now, let’s ignore that empirical evidence has shown that companies with diversity hiring programs actually tend to lower the number of minorities in their company, due to a hiring paradox that exists. It’s likely the case that still, some hiring quota practices that companies engage in result in a greater representation of minorities, and quotas with minority university applicants also result in a greater representation of minorities.

All that this does is just increase the upward economic mobility of minorities and decrease the upward mobility of majority groups. This doesn’t change the real reasons why racism has been so pernicious, which is the material consequences of racism. While it can be argued whether a quota practice is more or less biased, a quota system doesn’t actually substantially change the aggregate material welfare of people, it just changes who is at the top and who is at the bottom.

This doesn’t mean that quota policies are inherently bad practices. For example, diversity in corporations can in many cases be good, in that the differences in backgrounds statistically present with a more racially diverse group of people allows for a greater base of ideas from which to make decisions on. This improves the productivity of firms as better ideas tend to be produced from the more diverse group of people.

What this does mean is that while diversity hiring is good, it is one very small part of a large strategy to eliminate racism and its social problems. If all that was done was diversity hiring and surface-level virtue signaling, we would still have roughly the same inequality in society, it’d just be a much less racialized form of inequality.

I posit one hypothesis: this is a distraction. These practices are a distraction from the real solutions to many of these problems, which is to undo the material conditions that have been created from unbridled capitalist practices. Real advocacy and change would require many corporations to cut a portion of their profits, and that is something that corporations do not want to happen in any way whatsoever.

I don’t think distracting people is even the intention of most capitalists. It presumes too much malice, which I don’t think is usually there. This distraction is the consequence of capitalists riding on social trends that happen to be popular at the time. They see that anti-racist or pro-LGBT advocacy is popular, and so ride on that to make as much money as possible. Individual capitalists might care about these issues, or they might not. However, the prime motivation is profit.

This is where my intuitive cynicism of woke advertising has come from. It’s not a distaste for progressive issues but a distaste for the underlying reasons for why progressive advocacy is being engaged in. I don’t think that the pursuit of profit is inherently bad. People can do beautiful and amazing things in the pursuit of money for its own sake. What’s bad is when it distracts from important solutions to social problems and creates a culture of complacency in the pursuit of profit as the only means for social and economic advancement in society.

Woke capitalism is only bad if we deal with it as a society in a bad manner. If we engage with woke capitalism complacently, and fail to take any further steps to meanginfully address many of the problems woke capitalism ignores, we cannot move substantially towards any kind of a just society. We have to understand this reality if we can ever hope to move on to creating a just world. 

Sources/Resources:

https://philpapers.org/archive/ROSWNA-2.pdf

https://mises.org/library/libertarianisms-versus-postmodernism-and-social-justice-ideology-0

http://www-2.rotman.utoronto.ca/facbios/file/Whitening%20MS%20R2%20Accepted.pdf

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0022427898035002002

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2003.tb01002.x

https://philipperushton.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/iq-race-brain-size-racism-rushton-cernovsky-j-of-black-studies-7-1995.pdf
