---
layout: post
title: The West's Entanglement Evaporates
date: 2022-03-08
author: "Ignacio Andres"
---

Thirty years ago, the West won the greatest victory in world history. Without spilling any blood, the Soviet Union and its satellites collapsed into a multitude of states and the world was supposedly united again as the iron curtain fell. That was thirty years ago. Now, the West is buckling under the pressure of an intelligent Chinese strategy, a resurgent Russia intent on remaking the Soviet Union, and its disunity. After winning the greatest victory ever, how did the West crumble, and how, after several Russian and Chinese violations, is it only coming together after an invasion on its doorstep?

Since Peter the Great, Russia has always harboured an inferiority complex towards the West: the fear of being less civilised; it also harboured this sentiment to the great civilizations of the east. The Iron Curtain was always active, but during the Cold War, it surged into the heart of Europe.

This context in mind, it is understandable why Russia would launch an invasion into Ukraine- when a nation-state near you tries to become chummy with the West; it is wise to bring the state back in line to stop the West’s encroachment and to maintain a climate of inferiority against the West, something like what one of Freud or Jung’s patients would do- prolong their condition for no particular reason. Perhaps this is Russia adopting a specific posture- embracing the culture in the east. However, Russia’s culture is closer to Europe’s than China’s; why choose China as a potential partner when supply chains between both are tenuous at best? Perhaps the West rejected Russia, or at least that is how Russia feels.

Yeltsin and the early Putin all wanted to join NATO, to enter communion with the West. The West ignored their messages; thus, Putin went into communion with China, the rising world power and a source of culture. China and Russia make a unique combination; while Russia has a measly economy compared to other great powers, China has a robust, low-debt economy and can spend a great deal in wars. However, China doesn’t have the arms industry that Russia inherited from the Soviet Union; thus, a form of symbiosis was born; China would buy arms from Russia, boosting the latter’s economy while preparing China for a confrontation. 

This complicates the West’s position as the world’s ruler, but divisions within it have been fermenting since the end of World War Two. The Europeans, ever distrustful of American influence (perhaps with good reason), drifted away from the United States and formed their European bloc, which has been facing challenges and division of its own. The US is growing more isolationist and involves itself in wars that damage its reputation. The divisions facing the West with a lack of a common enemy were growing more pernicious and pertinent by the day. China was arguably the biggest issue, but its sway through investments and trade is staggering. 

Then Russia invaded Ukraine.

The West’s entanglement evaporated. They all formed a united front against the Russian wing of the Sino-Russian alliance and wreaked havoc on its economy. Even if Ukraine wins and Russia’s economy collapses, without some sort of revolution, Russia itself won’t collapse, and the defeat of Russia will come with certain diplomatic and economic costs towards the West. 

To prevent another situation like this, the West needs to adopt a more aggressive posture towards China and develop India, the only viable contender to China’s dominance, into a West- aligned superpower. This posture will come with certain economic and diplomatic costs that are bearable, given the economic, societal, and cultural costs that a dominant China will impose on the West. I am not saying that the West’s heroes, religions, and philosophies are superior to China’s, nor am I saying that we should hate the Chinese. However, an aggressive stance towards China, which is becoming the world’s premier power, is beneficial towards the West, especially when the government that China has adopted is the exact opposite of our enlightenment values. It will take time to formulate a plan against such an exacting foreign policy such as China’s, especially when the hegemony of the West humiliated China and drew it away from its hegemony, which it had maintained since the beginning of China to the Opium Wars. The West is not all good, but it is better than the alternative.

The best comedies are the ones that have the punchline hiding in plain sight; let us not end the story of the West like this.
